readme.md, before:

# Stable-Dreamfusion

A pytorch implementation of the text-to-3D model **Dreamfusion**, powered by the [Stable Diffusion](https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion) text-to-2D model.

The original paper's project page: [_DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D Diffusion_](https://dreamfusion3d.github.io/).

**NEWS (2023.1.30)**: Generation quality is better with many improvements proposed by [Magic3D](https://deepimagination.cc/Magic3D/)!

**NEWS (2023.3.12)**: A [Taichi](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi) backend is available for Instant-NGP. **No CUDA** build is requied while it achieves comparable performance!

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25863658/215996308-9fd959f5-b5c7-4a8e-a241-0fe63ec86a4a.mp4

Colab notebooks: 
* Instant-NGP backbone (`-O`): [![Instant-NGP Backbone](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1MXT3yfOFvO0ooKEfiUUvTKwUkrrlCHpF?usp=sharing)

* Vanilla NeRF backbone (`-O2`): [![Vanilla Backbone](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1mvfxG-S_n_gZafWoattku7rLJ2kPoImL?usp=sharing) 

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25863658/194241493-f3e68f78-aefe-479e-a4a8-001424a61b37.mp4

### [Gallery](https://github.com/ashawkey/stable-dreamfusion/issues/1) | [Update Logs](assets/update_logs.md)

# Important Notice
This project is a **work-in-progress**, and contains lots of differences from the paper. Also, many features are still not implemented now. **The current generation quality cannot match the results from the original paper, and many prompts still fail badly!** 

## Notable differences from the paper
* Since the Imagen model is not publicly available, we use [Stable Diffusion](https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion) to replace it (implementation from [diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers)). Different from Imagen, Stable-Diffusion is a latent diffusion model, which diffuses in a latent space instead of the original image space. Therefore, we need the loss to propagate back from the VAE's encoder part too, which introduces extra time cost in training. Currently, 10000 training steps take about 3 hours to train on a V100.
* We use the [multi-resolution grid encoder](https://github.com/NVlabs/instant-ngp/) to implement the NeRF backbone (implementation from [torch-ngp](https://github.com/ashawkey/torch-ngp)), which enables much faster rendering (~10FPS at 800x800). The surface normals are predicted with an MLP as [Magic3D](https://deepimagination.cc/Magic3D/).
* The vanilla NeRF backbone is also supported now, but the Mip-NeRF backbone as the paper is still not implemented.
* We use the [Adan](https://github.com/sail-sg/Adan) optimizer as default.
* The multi-face [Janus problem](https://twitter.com/poolio/status/1578045212236034048) is likely to be caused by the text-to-2D model's capability, as discussed by [Magic3D](https://deepimagination.cc/Magic3D/) in Figure 4 and *Can single-stage optimization work with LDM prior?*.


# Install

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ashawkey/stable-dreamfusion.git
cd stable-dreamfusion
```

### Install with pip
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt

# (optional) install nvdiffrast for exporting textured mesh (if use --save_mesh)
pip install git+https://github.com/NVlabs/nvdiffrast/

# (optional) install CLIP guidance for the dreamfield setting
pip install git+https://github.com/openai/CLIP.git

```

### Build extension (optional)
By default, we use [`load`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/cpp_extension.html#torch.utils.cpp_extension.load) to build the extension at runtime.
We also provide the `setup.py` to build each extension:
```bash
# install all extension modules
bash scripts/install_ext.sh

# if you want to install manually, here is an example:
pip install ./raymarching # install to python path (you still need the raymarching/ folder, since this only installs the built extension.)
```

### Taichi backend (optional)
Use [Taichi](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi) backend for Instant-NGP. It achieves comparable performance to CUDA implementation while **No CUDA** build is required. Install Taichi with pip: 
```bash
pip install taichi
```

### Tested environments
* Ubuntu 22 with torch 1.12 & CUDA 11.6 on a V100.


# Usage

First time running will take some time to compile the CUDA extensions.

```bash
#### stable-dreamfusion setting

### Instant-NGP NeRF Backbone 
# + faster rendering speed
# + less GPU memory (~16G)
# - need to build CUDA extensions (a CUDA-free Taichi backend is available)
# - worse surface quality

## train with text prompt (with the default settings)
# `-O` equals `--cuda_ray --fp16 --dir_text`
# `--cuda_ray` enables instant-ngp-like occupancy grid based acceleration.
# `--fp16` enables half-precision training.
# `--dir_text` enables view-dependent prompting.
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O

# If the above gives you CUDA out of memory errors, try the memory saving config.
# It makes torch use float16 precision for weights, which might trade away some output quality.
# It also enables attention slicing which might trade away some execution speed.
# Tested to run fine on 8GB VRAM (Nvidia 3070 Ti).
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --memory_saving_sd_config
# use CUDA-free Taichi backend with `--backbone grid_taichi`
python3 main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --backbone grid_taichi

# choose stable-diffusion version (support 1.5, 2.0 and 2.1, default is 2.1 now)
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --sd_version 1.5

# we also support negative text prompt now:
python main.py --text "a rose" --negative "red" --workspace trial -O

## if the above command fails to generate meaningful things (learns an empty scene), maybe try:
# 1. disable random lambertian/textureless shading, simply use albedo as color:
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --albedo
# 2. use a smaller density regularization weight:
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --lambda_entropy 1e-5

# you can also train in a GUI to visualize the training progress:
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --gui

# A Gradio GUI is also possible (with less options):
python gradio_app.py # open in web browser

## after the training is finished:
# test (exporting 360 degree video)
python main.py --workspace trial -O --test
# also save a mesh (with obj, mtl, and png texture)
python main.py --workspace trial -O --test --save_mesh
# test with a GUI (free view control!)
python main.py --workspace trial -O --test --gui

### Vanilla NeRF backbone
# + better surface quality
# + pure pytorch, no need to build extensions!
# - slow rendering speed
# - more GPU memory

## train
# `-O2` equals `--dir_text --backbone vanilla`
python main.py --text "a hotdog" --workspace trial2 -O2

## if CUDA OOM, maybe try:
# 1. only use albedo rendering, less GPU memory (~16G), train faster, but results may be worse
python main.py --text "a hotdog" --workspace trial2 -O2 --albedo
# 2. reduce NeRF sampling steps (--num_steps and --upsample_steps)
python main.py --text "a hotdog" --workspace trial2 -O2 --num_steps 64 --upsample_steps 0

## test
python main.py --workspace trial2 -O2 --test
python main.py --workspace trial2 -O2 --test --save_mesh
python main.py --workspace trial2 -O2 --test --gui # not recommended, FPS will be low.
```

# Code organization & Advanced tips

This is a simple description of the most important implementation details. 
If you are interested in improving this repo, this might be a starting point.
Any contribution would be greatly appreciated!

* The SDS loss is located at `./nerf/sd.py > StableDiffusion > train_step`:
```python
## 1. we need to interpolate the NeRF rendering to 512x512, to feed it to SD's VAE.
pred_rgb_512 = F.interpolate(pred_rgb, (512, 512), mode='bilinear', align_corners=False)
## 2. image (512x512) --- VAE --> latents (64x64), this is SD's difference from Imagen.
latents = self.encode_imgs(pred_rgb_512)
... # timestep sampling, noise adding and UNet noise predicting
## 3. the SDS loss
w = (1 - self.alphas[t])
grad = w * (noise_pred - noise)
# since UNet part is ignored and cannot simply audodiff, we have two ways to set the grad:
# 3.1. call backward and set the grad now (need to retain graph since we will call a second backward for the other losses later)
latents.backward(gradient=grad, retain_graph=True)
return 0 # dummy loss
# 3.2. use a custom function to set a hook in backward, so we only call backward once (credits to @elliottzheng)
class SpecifyGradient(torch.autograd.Function):
    @staticmethod
    @custom_fwd
    def forward(ctx, input_tensor, gt_grad):
        ctx.save_for_backward(gt_grad) 
        # we return a dummy value 1, which will be scaled by amp's scaler so we get the scale in backward.
        return torch.ones([1], device=input_tensor.device, dtype=input_tensor.dtype) 

    @staticmethod
    @custom_bwd
    def backward(ctx, grad_scale):
        gt_grad, = ctx.saved_tensors
        gt_grad = gt_grad * grad_scale
        return gt_grad, None

loss = SpecifyGradient.apply(latents, grad)
return loss # functional loss      
```
* Other regularizations are in `./nerf/utils.py > Trainer > train_step`. 
    * The generation seems quite sensitive to regularizations on weights_sum (alphas for each ray). The original opacity loss tends to make NeRF disappear (zero density everywhere), so we use an entropy loss to replace it for now (encourages alpha to be either 0 or 1).
* NeRF Rendering core function: `./nerf/renderer.py > NeRFRenderer > run & run_cuda`.
* Shading & normal evaluation: `./nerf/network*.py > NeRFNetwork > forward`.
    * light direction: current implementation use a plane light source, instead of a point light source.
* View-dependent prompting: `./nerf/provider.py > get_view_direction`.
    * use `--angle_overhead, --angle_front` to set the border.
    * use `--suppress_face` to add `face` as a negative prompt at all directions except `front`.
* Network backbone (`./nerf/network*.py`) can be chosen by the `--backbone` option.
* Spatial density bias (density blob): `./nerf/network*.py > NeRFNetwork > density_blob`.

# Acknowledgement

* The amazing original work: [_DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D Diffusion_](https://dreamfusion3d.github.io/).
    ```
    @article{poole2022dreamfusion,
        author = {Poole, Ben and Jain, Ajay and Barron, Jonathan T. and Mildenhall, Ben},
        title = {DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D Diffusion},
        journal = {arXiv},
        year = {2022},
    }
    ```

* Huge thanks to the [Stable Diffusion](https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion) and the [diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers) library. 

    ```
    @misc{rombach2021highresolution,
        title={High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models}, 
        author={Robin Rombach and Andreas Blattmann and Dominik Lorenz and Patrick Esser and Björn Ommer},
        year={2021},
        eprint={2112.10752},
        archivePrefix={arXiv},
        primaryClass={cs.CV}
    }

    @misc{von-platen-etal-2022-diffusers,
        author = {Patrick von Platen and Suraj Patil and Anton Lozhkov and Pedro Cuenca and Nathan Lambert and Kashif Rasul and Mishig Davaadorj and Thomas Wolf},
        title = {Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models},
        year = {2022},
        publisher = {GitHub},
        journal = {GitHub repository},
        howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers}}
    }
    ```

* The GUI is developed with [DearPyGui](https://github.com/hoffstadt/DearPyGui).

# Citation

If you find this work useful, a citation will be appreciated via:
```
@misc{stable-dreamfusion,
    Author = {Jiaxiang Tang},
    Year = {2022},
    Note = {https://github.com/ashawkey/stable-dreamfusion},
    Title = {Stable-dreamfusion: Text-to-3D with Stable-diffusion}
}
```

Commit message:

Adds another level of vram optimization

readme.md, after:

# Stable-Dreamfusion

A pytorch implementation of the text-to-3D model **Dreamfusion**, powered by the [Stable Diffusion](https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion) text-to-2D model.

The original paper's project page: [_DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D Diffusion_](https://dreamfusion3d.github.io/).

**NEWS (2023.1.30)**: Generation quality is better with many improvements proposed by [Magic3D](https://deepimagination.cc/Magic3D/)!

**NEWS (2023.3.12)**: A [Taichi](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi) backend is available for Instant-NGP. **No CUDA** build is requied while it achieves comparable performance!

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25863658/215996308-9fd959f5-b5c7-4a8e-a241-0fe63ec86a4a.mp4

Colab notebooks: 
* Instant-NGP backbone (`-O`): [![Instant-NGP Backbone](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1MXT3yfOFvO0ooKEfiUUvTKwUkrrlCHpF?usp=sharing)

* Vanilla NeRF backbone (`-O2`): [![Vanilla Backbone](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1mvfxG-S_n_gZafWoattku7rLJ2kPoImL?usp=sharing) 

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25863658/194241493-f3e68f78-aefe-479e-a4a8-001424a61b37.mp4

### [Gallery](https://github.com/ashawkey/stable-dreamfusion/issues/1) | [Update Logs](assets/update_logs.md)

# Important Notice
This project is a **work-in-progress**, and contains lots of differences from the paper. Also, many features are still not implemented now. **The current generation quality cannot match the results from the original paper, and many prompts still fail badly!** 

## Notable differences from the paper
* Since the Imagen model is not publicly available, we use [Stable Diffusion](https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion) to replace it (implementation from [diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers)). Different from Imagen, Stable-Diffusion is a latent diffusion model, which diffuses in a latent space instead of the original image space. Therefore, we need the loss to propagate back from the VAE's encoder part too, which introduces extra time cost in training. Currently, 10000 training steps take about 3 hours to train on a V100.
* We use the [multi-resolution grid encoder](https://github.com/NVlabs/instant-ngp/) to implement the NeRF backbone (implementation from [torch-ngp](https://github.com/ashawkey/torch-ngp)), which enables much faster rendering (~10FPS at 800x800). The surface normals are predicted with an MLP as [Magic3D](https://deepimagination.cc/Magic3D/).
* The vanilla NeRF backbone is also supported now, but the Mip-NeRF backbone as the paper is still not implemented.
* We use the [Adan](https://github.com/sail-sg/Adan) optimizer as default.
* The multi-face [Janus problem](https://twitter.com/poolio/status/1578045212236034048) is likely to be caused by the text-to-2D model's capability, as discussed by [Magic3D](https://deepimagination.cc/Magic3D/) in Figure 4 and *Can single-stage optimization work with LDM prior?*.


# Install

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ashawkey/stable-dreamfusion.git
cd stable-dreamfusion
```

### Install with pip
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt

# (optional) install nvdiffrast for exporting textured mesh (if use --save_mesh)
pip install git+https://github.com/NVlabs/nvdiffrast/

# (optional) install CLIP guidance for the dreamfield setting
pip install git+https://github.com/openai/CLIP.git

```

### Build extension (optional)
By default, we use [`load`](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/cpp_extension.html#torch.utils.cpp_extension.load) to build the extension at runtime.
We also provide the `setup.py` to build each extension:
```bash
# install all extension modules
bash scripts/install_ext.sh

# if you want to install manually, here is an example:
pip install ./raymarching # install to python path (you still need the raymarching/ folder, since this only installs the built extension.)
```

### Taichi backend (optional)
Use [Taichi](https://github.com/taichi-dev/taichi) backend for Instant-NGP. It achieves comparable performance to CUDA implementation while **No CUDA** build is required. Install Taichi with pip: 
```bash
pip install taichi
```

### Tested environments
* Ubuntu 22 with torch 1.12 & CUDA 11.6 on a V100.


# Usage

First time running will take some time to compile the CUDA extensions.

```bash
#### stable-dreamfusion setting

### Instant-NGP NeRF Backbone 
# + faster rendering speed
# + less GPU memory (~16G)
# - need to build CUDA extensions (a CUDA-free Taichi backend is available)
# - worse surface quality

## train with text prompt (with the default settings)
# `-O` equals `--cuda_ray --fp16 --dir_text`
# `--cuda_ray` enables instant-ngp-like occupancy grid based acceleration.
# `--fp16` enables half-precision training.
# `--dir_text` enables view-dependent prompting.
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O

# If the above gives you CUDA out of memory errors, try vram optimization level 1.
# It makes torch use float16 precision for weights, which might trade away some output quality.
# It also enables attention slicing which might trade away some execution speed.
# Tested to run fine on 8GB VRAM (Nvidia 3070 Ti).
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --vram_O 1
# To further trade away time for more vram, try vram optimization level 2
# Might allow larger --w and --h, which gives slower but higher quality results.
# Tested to run fine on 8GB VRAM (Nvidia 3070 Ti).
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --vram_O 1 --w 128 --h 128
# use CUDA-free Taichi backend with `--backbone grid_taichi`
python3 main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --backbone grid_taichi

# choose stable-diffusion version (support 1.5, 2.0 and 2.1, default is 2.1 now)
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --sd_version 1.5

# we also support negative text prompt now:
python main.py --text "a rose" --negative "red" --workspace trial -O

## if the above command fails to generate meaningful things (learns an empty scene), maybe try:
# 1. disable random lambertian/textureless shading, simply use albedo as color:
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --albedo
# 2. use a smaller density regularization weight:
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --lambda_entropy 1e-5

# you can also train in a GUI to visualize the training progress:
python main.py --text "a hamburger" --workspace trial -O --gui

# A Gradio GUI is also possible (with less options):
python gradio_app.py # open in web browser

## after the training is finished:
# test (exporting 360 degree video)
python main.py --workspace trial -O --test
# also save a mesh (with obj, mtl, and png texture)
python main.py --workspace trial -O --test --save_mesh
# test with a GUI (free view control!)
python main.py --workspace trial -O --test --gui

### Vanilla NeRF backbone
# + better surface quality
# + pure pytorch, no need to build extensions!
# - slow rendering speed
# - more GPU memory

## train
# `-O2` equals `--dir_text --backbone vanilla`
python main.py --text "a hotdog" --workspace trial2 -O2

## if CUDA OOM, maybe try:
# 1. only use albedo rendering, less GPU memory (~16G), train faster, but results may be worse
python main.py --text "a hotdog" --workspace trial2 -O2 --albedo
# 2. reduce NeRF sampling steps (--num_steps and --upsample_steps)
python main.py --text "a hotdog" --workspace trial2 -O2 --num_steps 64 --upsample_steps 0

## test
python main.py --workspace trial2 -O2 --test
python main.py --workspace trial2 -O2 --test --save_mesh
python main.py --workspace trial2 -O2 --test --gui # not recommended, FPS will be low.
```

# Code organization & Advanced tips

This is a simple description of the most important implementation details. 
If you are interested in improving this repo, this might be a starting point.
Any contribution would be greatly appreciated!

* The SDS loss is located at `./nerf/sd.py > StableDiffusion > train_step`:
```python
## 1. we need to interpolate the NeRF rendering to 512x512, to feed it to SD's VAE.
pred_rgb_512 = F.interpolate(pred_rgb, (512, 512), mode='bilinear', align_corners=False)
## 2. image (512x512) --- VAE --> latents (64x64), this is SD's difference from Imagen.
latents = self.encode_imgs(pred_rgb_512)
... # timestep sampling, noise adding and UNet noise predicting
## 3. the SDS loss
w = (1 - self.alphas[t])
grad = w * (noise_pred - noise)
# since UNet part is ignored and cannot simply audodiff, we have two ways to set the grad:
# 3.1. call backward and set the grad now (need to retain graph since we will call a second backward for the other losses later)
latents.backward(gradient=grad, retain_graph=True)
return 0 # dummy loss
# 3.2. use a custom function to set a hook in backward, so we only call backward once (credits to @elliottzheng)
class SpecifyGradient(torch.autograd.Function):
    @staticmethod
    @custom_fwd
    def forward(ctx, input_tensor, gt_grad):
        ctx.save_for_backward(gt_grad) 
        # we return a dummy value 1, which will be scaled by amp's scaler so we get the scale in backward.
        return torch.ones([1], device=input_tensor.device, dtype=input_tensor.dtype) 

    @staticmethod
    @custom_bwd
    def backward(ctx, grad_scale):
        gt_grad, = ctx.saved_tensors
        gt_grad = gt_grad * grad_scale
        return gt_grad, None

loss = SpecifyGradient.apply(latents, grad)
return loss # functional loss      
```
* Other regularizations are in `./nerf/utils.py > Trainer > train_step`. 
    * The generation seems quite sensitive to regularizations on weights_sum (alphas for each ray). The original opacity loss tends to make NeRF disappear (zero density everywhere), so we use an entropy loss to replace it for now (encourages alpha to be either 0 or 1).
* NeRF Rendering core function: `./nerf/renderer.py > NeRFRenderer > run & run_cuda`.
* Shading & normal evaluation: `./nerf/network*.py > NeRFNetwork > forward`.
    * light direction: current implementation use a plane light source, instead of a point light source.
* View-dependent prompting: `./nerf/provider.py > get_view_direction`.
    * use `--angle_overhead, --angle_front` to set the border.
    * use `--suppress_face` to add `face` as a negative prompt at all directions except `front`.
* Network backbone (`./nerf/network*.py`) can be chosen by the `--backbone` option.
* Spatial density bias (density blob): `./nerf/network*.py > NeRFNetwork > density_blob`.

# Acknowledgement

* The amazing original work: [_DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D Diffusion_](https://dreamfusion3d.github.io/).
    ```
    @article{poole2022dreamfusion,
        author = {Poole, Ben and Jain, Ajay and Barron, Jonathan T. and Mildenhall, Ben},
        title = {DreamFusion: Text-to-3D using 2D Diffusion},
        journal = {arXiv},
        year = {2022},
    }
    ```

* Huge thanks to the [Stable Diffusion](https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion) and the [diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers) library. 

    ```
    @misc{rombach2021highresolution,
        title={High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models}, 
        author={Robin Rombach and Andreas Blattmann and Dominik Lorenz and Patrick Esser and Björn Ommer},
        year={2021},
        eprint={2112.10752},
        archivePrefix={arXiv},
        primaryClass={cs.CV}
    }

    @misc{von-platen-etal-2022-diffusers,
        author = {Patrick von Platen and Suraj Patil and Anton Lozhkov and Pedro Cuenca and Nathan Lambert and Kashif Rasul and Mishig Davaadorj and Thomas Wolf},
        title = {Diffusers: State-of-the-art diffusion models},
        year = {2022},
        publisher = {GitHub},
        journal = {GitHub repository},
        howpublished = {\url{https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers}}
    }
    ```

* The GUI is developed with [DearPyGui](https://github.com/hoffstadt/DearPyGui).

# Citation

If you find this work useful, a citation will be appreciated via:
```
@misc{stable-dreamfusion,
    Author = {Jiaxiang Tang},
    Year = {2022},
    Note = {https://github.com/ashawkey/stable-dreamfusion},
    Title = {Stable-dreamfusion: Text-to-3D with Stable-diffusion}
}
```
